README.md, before:

# deckr41/nvim

> A Neovim plugin that augments coding with LLM abilities, enabling per-project
> AI customization through colocated `.d41rc` files that act as agents for your
> project folders or monorepo packages.

![On demand, one-line autocompletion with Anthropic](docs/screenshot_finish-line.png)

## Table of contents

<!-- vim-markdown-toc GFM -->

* [Thoughts](#thoughts)
* [Installation](#installation)
    * [Minimal Configuration](#minimal-configuration)
    * [Full Configuration Options](#full-configuration-options)
    * [Setting Up API Keys](#setting-up-api-keys)
* [Usage](#usage)
    * [Modes](#modes)
    * [Default Keybindings](#default-keybindings)
    * [Commands](#commands)
* [Development](#development)
    * [Code overview](#code-overview)
* [Credits](#credits)
* [Related Plugins](#related-plugins)

<!-- vim-markdown-toc -->

## Thoughts

:construction: **Prompt Engineering**  
Create and iterate over `commands`, a combination of `system_prompt`, `prompt`,
and `context`. Commands can be project-wide or specific to a library in your
monorepo through localized `.d41rc` files. This approach allows per-project AI
customization, effectively turning folders into agents—laying the groundwork
for multi-agent AI workflows.

**Multiple gears**  
:godmode: `easy-does-it`  
Use LLM suggestions when stuck, saving yourself a web search without breaking
flow. Press `<Shift-RightArrow>` to trigger suggestions on demand.  
Avoid relying on it for all the things all the time; give yourself a few
seconds, minutes, even hours :scream:. 

:rocket: `r-for-rocket`  
Use when you already know what you're doing and want to complete a line or
block quickly. This mode triggers suggestions automatically as you type,
debounced with a configurable timeout. Be mindful that *tab-coding* can be
detrimental without patience and understanding - risking a *doom-scrolling*
effect.

:hammer: **Tools** *(Work in Progress)*  
Enhance `commands` with extra features by incorporating custom `tools`. For
example, you can define tools that perform specific tasks like scientific
computations, interact with custom APIs, or generate graphs. This enables more
complex and powerful interactions, giving more accurate and context-aware
suggestions.

:mag: **Semantic Search** *(Work in Progress)*  
Enhance the relevance of AI suggestions by providing richer context. Commands
can pull in data on demand depending on the use case:
- **Link to Specific Files**: Include content from specific files relative to
  the .d41rc file.  
  `"context": ["file://coding-standards.md"]`
- **Perform Semantic Searches**: Search within sibling folders and attach the
  top 3 files as context.  
  `"context": ["semq:3://best practice examples of Jest tests"`

:books: **Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) with
[DevDocs](https://github.com/freeCodeCamp/devdocs/tree/main)** *(Work in
Progress)*  
Integrate [devdocs.io](https://devdocs.io/), which combines multiple API
documentations into a fast, organized, and searchable interface. By
incorporating DevDocs, you can perform semantic searches over documentation and
inject relevant snippets directly into your AI prompts. This reduces
hallucinations and ensures the AI provides up-to-date and accurate information.

Example:

- **TechDocsTool**: A `tool` that accepts parameters like technology name,
  version, and query to perform semantic searches in documentation and return
  relevant information.

:art: **UI/UX/DX**  
Aiming for minimalism. Fewer shortcuts and configurations are better. Mnemonics
are helpful, and *just-in-time* is preferred over *all-the-time*. Buffers are
the canvas, and while creating a conversational UI inside the editor is
possible, it might miss the essence of seamless integration.

## Installation

### Minimal Configuration

To get started with `deckr41/nvim`, you need to have either the `OPENAI_API_KEY`
or `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY` environment variables set. If both are available, the
plugin will default to using Anthropic.

**Default Backends**:

- **OpenAI**: Uses `gpt-4o-mini` as the default model.
- **Anthropic**: Uses `claude-3-5-sonnet-20240620` as the default model.

**Example using `lazy.nvim`**:

```lua
{
  "deckr41/nvim",
  dependencies = {
    "nvim-lua/plenary.nvim",
    "nvim-telescope/telescope.nvim",
  },
}
```

### Full Configuration Options

You can customize the plugin by providing additional options. Below is the
default configuration with all available settings:

```lua
{
  "deckr41/nvim",
  opts = {
    -- Mode configuration
    mode = {
      -- Choose between "easy-does-it" and "r-for-rocket"
      type = "easy-does-it",

      -- Debounce timeout in milliseconds, relevant for `r-for-rocket` mode
      timeout = 1000,
    },

    -- Backend configurations
    backends = {
      openai = {
        url = "https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions",
        api_key = os.getenv("OPENAI_API_KEY"),
        default_model = "gpt-4o-mini",
        available_models = {
          ["gpt-4o"] = { max_tokens = 4096 },
          ["gpt-4o-2024-08-06"] = { max_tokens = 16384 },
          ["gpt-4o-mini"] = { max_tokens = 16384 },
        },
        temperature = 0.2,
      },
      anthropic = {
        url = "https://api.anthropic.com/v1/messages",
        api_key = os.getenv("ANTHROPIC_API_KEY"),
        default_model = "claude-3-5-sonnet-20240620",
        available_models = {
          ["claude-3-5-sonnet-20240620"] = { max_tokens = 1024 },
        },
        temperature = 0.2,
      },
    },

    -- If not specified, the auto-detect backed is used. 
    -- If both are active, Anthropic is used.
    active_backend = nil,

    -- If not specified, the backend's `default_model` is used.
    active_model = nil, 

    -- Command triggered by pressing `<S-Right>` once.
    default_command = "finish-line",

    -- Command triggered by pressing `<S-Right>` twice quickly.
    default_double_command = "finish-block",
  },
  dependencies = {
    "nvim-lua/plenary.nvim",
    "nvim-telescope/telescope.nvim",
  },
}
```

### Setting Up API Keys

Ensure you have set the necessary environment variables:

- For **OpenAI**: `OPENAI_API_KEY`
- For **Anthropic**: `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY`

Add them to your shell's profile file (`.bashrc`, `.zshrc`, etc.):

```bash
export OPENAI_API_KEY="your-openai-api-key"
export ANTHROPIC_API_KEY="your-anthropic-api-key"
```

> [!NOTE] 
> Integration with password managers is somewhere in the backlog. 

## Usage

### Modes

The plugin offers two modes to cater to different coding styles:

- `easy-does-it`  
This is the default mode. Trigger suggestions on demand by pressing
`<Shift-RightArrow>`. Ideal for developers who prefer focused coding and seek
AI assistance only when needed. Helps prevent over-reliance on AI and maintains
coding flow.
- `r-for-rocket`  
Suggestions are triggered automatically as you type, debounced with a
configurable timeout (default is 1000ms). This mode provides continuous AI
assistance, akin to having an AI co-pilot. Useful for those who prefer
real-time suggestions.

You can switch between modes by setting the type in the mode configuration:

```lua
opts = {
  mode = {
    type = "r-for-rocket",
    -- Adjust the debounce timeout as needed
    timeout = 1000,
  }
}
```

### Default Keybindings

**INSERT** mode:

- **`<Shift-RightArrow>`**: Trigger the default command (`finish-line`) or
  accept the current suggestion.
  - Pressing `<S-Right>` once will trigger the `finish-line` command.
  - Pressing `<S-Right>` twice quickly will trigger the `finish-block` command.
- **`<Tab>`**, **`<CR>`** or **`<S-Right>`** with a suggestion available:
  Accept the suggestion and insert it into the buffer.
- **`<Escape>`**: Dismiss the current suggestion without inserting.

> [!NOTE]
> Currently, only **INSERT** mode is supported. Running commands in **VISUAL**
> and **NORMAL** mode will be implemented soon.

### Commands

- **`:D41Eject`**: Ejects the default `.d41rc` file into your current working
  directory for customization.

## Development

### Code overview

The plugin's architecture is modular, with each component responsible for a
specific functionality:

![Plugin code overview diagram](docs/code-overview.svg)

## Credits

- [llm.nvim](https://github.com/melbaldove/llm.nvim) - Provided inspiration for
  simple and effective implementation.
- [ell](https://github.com/MadcowD/ell) - Highlighted the importance of
  treating prompts as algorithms that require iteration and debugging (intro by
  [Ian Wootten](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IQI5BZlVI3Y)).

## Related Plugins

- [ChatGPT.nvim](https://github.com/jackMort/ChatGPT.nvim) - Effortless Natural
  Language Generation with OpenAI's ChatGPT API 
- [avante.nvim](https://github.com/yetone/avante.nvim) - Use your Neovim like
  using Cursor AI IDE! 
- [codecompanion.nvim](https://github.com/olimorris/codecompanion.nvim) -
  AI-powered coding, seamlessly in Neovim. Supports Anthropic, Copilot, Gemini,
  Ollama and OpenAI LLMs

Commit message:

docs: shorten a few things in README.md

README.md, after:

# deckr41/nvim

> A Neovim plugin that augments coding with LLM abilities, enabling per-project
> AI customization through collocated `.d41rc` files that act as agents for
> your project folders or monorepo packages.

![On demand, one-line autocompletion with Anthropic](docs/screenshot_finish-line.png)

## Table of contents

<!-- vim-markdown-toc GFM -->

* [Thoughts](#thoughts)
* [Installation](#installation)
    * [Minimal Configuration](#minimal-configuration)
    * [Full Configuration Options](#full-configuration-options)
    * [Setting Up API Keys](#setting-up-api-keys)
* [Usage](#usage)
    * [Modes](#modes)
    * [Default Keybindings](#default-keybindings)
    * [Commands](#commands)
* [Development](#development)
    * [Code overview](#code-overview)
* [Credits](#credits)
* [Related Plugins](#related-plugins)

<!-- vim-markdown-toc -->

## Thoughts

:construction: **Prompt Engineering**  
Create and iterate over `commands`, a combination of `system_prompt`, `prompt`,
and `context`. Commands can be project-wide or specific to a library in your
monorepo through localized `.d41rc` files. This approach allows per-project AI
customization, effectively turning folders into agents—laying the groundwork
for multi-agent AI workflows.

**Multiple gears**  
- :godmode: `easy-does-it`  
  Trigger LLM suggestions with `<Shift-RightArrow>` when stuck. Take your time;
  it's worth it.
- :rocket: `r-for-rocket`  
  For rapid coding, suggestions appear as you type, with a configurable
  timeout. Tread carefully, *tab-coding* rhymes with *doom-scrolling*.

:hammer: **Tools** *(Work in Progress)*  
Enhance `commands` with extra features by incorporating custom `tools`. For
example, you can define tools that perform specific tasks like scientific
computations, interact with custom APIs, or generate graphs. This enables more
complex and powerful interactions, giving more accurate and context-aware
suggestions.

:mag: **Semantic Search** *(Work in Progress)*  
Enhance the relevance of AI suggestions by providing richer context. Commands
can pull in data on demand depending on the use case:
- **Link to Specific Files**: Include content from specific files relative to
  the .d41rc file.  
  `"context": ["file://coding-standards.md"]`
- **Perform Semantic Searches**: Search within sibling folders and attach the
  top 3 files as context.  
  `"context": ["semq:3://best practice examples of Jest tests"`

:books: **Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) with
[DevDocs](https://github.com/freeCodeCamp/devdocs/tree/main)** *(Work in
Progress)*  
Integrate [devdocs.io](https://devdocs.io/), which combines multiple API
documentations into a fast, organized, and searchable interface. By
incorporating DevDocs, you can perform semantic searches over documentation and
inject relevant snippets directly into your AI prompts. This reduces
hallucinations and ensures the AI provides up-to-date and accurate information.

Example:

- **TechDocsTool**: A `tool` that accepts parameters like technology name,
  version, and query to perform semantic searches in documentation and return
  relevant information.

:art: **UI/UX/DX**  
Aiming for minimalism. Fewer shortcuts and configurations are better. Mnemonics
are helpful, and *just-in-time* is preferred over *all-the-time*. Buffers are
the canvas, and while creating a conversational UI inside the editor is
possible, it might miss the essence of seamless integration.

## Installation

### Minimal Configuration

To get started with `deckr41/nvim`, you need to have either the `OPENAI_API_KEY`
or `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY` environment variables set. If both are available, the
plugin will default to using Anthropic.

**Default Backends**:

- **OpenAI**: Uses `gpt-4o-mini` as the default model.
- **Anthropic**: Uses `claude-3-5-sonnet-20240620` as the default model.

**Example using `lazy.nvim`**:

```lua
{
  "deckr41/nvim",
  dependencies = {
    "nvim-lua/plenary.nvim",
    "nvim-telescope/telescope.nvim",
  },
}
```

### Full Configuration Options

You can customize the plugin by providing additional options. Below is the
default configuration with all available settings:

```lua
{
  "deckr41/nvim",
  opts = {
    -- Mode configuration
    mode = {
      -- Choose between "easy-does-it" and "r-for-rocket"
      type = "easy-does-it",

      -- Debounce timeout in milliseconds, relevant for `r-for-rocket` mode
      timeout = 1000,
    },

    -- Backend configurations
    backends = {
      openai = {
        url = "https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions",
        api_key = os.getenv("OPENAI_API_KEY"),
        default_model = "gpt-4o-mini",
        available_models = {
          ["gpt-4o"] = { max_tokens = 4096 },
          ["gpt-4o-2024-08-06"] = { max_tokens = 16384 },
          ["gpt-4o-mini"] = { max_tokens = 16384 },
        },
        temperature = 0.2,
      },
      anthropic = {
        url = "https://api.anthropic.com/v1/messages",
        api_key = os.getenv("ANTHROPIC_API_KEY"),
        default_model = "claude-3-5-sonnet-20240620",
        available_models = {
          ["claude-3-5-sonnet-20240620"] = { max_tokens = 1024 },
        },
        temperature = 0.2,
      },
    },

    -- If not specified, the auto-detect backed is used. 
    -- If both are active, Anthropic is used.
    active_backend = nil,

    -- If not specified, the backend's `default_model` is used.
    active_model = nil, 

    -- Command triggered by pressing `<S-Right>` once.
    default_command = "finish-line",

    -- Command triggered by pressing `<S-Right>` twice quickly.
    default_double_command = "finish-block",
  },
  dependencies = {
    "nvim-lua/plenary.nvim",
    "nvim-telescope/telescope.nvim",
  },
}
```

### Setting Up API Keys

Ensure you have set the necessary environment variables:

- For **OpenAI**: `OPENAI_API_KEY`
- For **Anthropic**: `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY`

Add them to your shell's profile file (`.bashrc`, `.zshrc`, etc.):

```bash
export OPENAI_API_KEY="your-openai-api-key"
export ANTHROPIC_API_KEY="your-anthropic-api-key"
```

> [!NOTE] 
> Integration with password managers is somewhere in the backlog. 

## Usage

### Modes

The plugin offers two modes to cater to different coding styles:

- `easy-does-it`  
This is the default mode. Trigger suggestions on demand by pressing
`<Shift-RightArrow>`. Ideal for developers who prefer focused coding and seek
AI assistance only when needed. Helps prevent over-reliance on AI and maintains
coding flow.
- `r-for-rocket`  
Suggestions are triggered automatically as you type, debounced with a
configurable timeout (default is 1000ms). This mode provides continuous AI
assistance, akin to having an AI co-pilot. Useful for those who prefer
real-time suggestions.

You can switch between modes by setting the type in the mode configuration:

```lua
opts = {
  mode = {
    type = "r-for-rocket",
    -- Adjust the debounce timeout as needed
    timeout = 1000,
  }
}
```

### Default Keybindings

**INSERT** mode:

- **`<Shift-RightArrow>`**: Trigger the default command (`finish-line`) or
  accept the current suggestion.
  - Pressing `<S-Right>` once will trigger the `finish-line` command.
  - Pressing `<S-Right>` twice quickly will trigger the `finish-block` command.
- **`<Tab>`**, **`<CR>`** or **`<S-Right>`** with a suggestion available:
  Accept the suggestion and insert it into the buffer.
- **`<Escape>`**: Dismiss the current suggestion without inserting.

> [!NOTE]
> Currently, only **INSERT** mode is supported. Running commands in **VISUAL**
> and **NORMAL** mode will be implemented soon.

### Commands

- **`:D41Eject`**: Ejects the default `.d41rc` file into your current working
  directory for customization.

## Development

### Code overview

The plugin's architecture is modular, with each component responsible for a
specific functionality:

![Plugin code overview diagram](docs/code-overview.svg)

## Credits

- [llm.nvim](https://github.com/melbaldove/llm.nvim) - Provided inspiration for
  simple and effective implementation.
- [ell](https://github.com/MadcowD/ell) - Highlighted the importance of
  treating prompts as algorithms that require iteration and debugging (intro by
  [Ian Wootten](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IQI5BZlVI3Y)).

## Related Plugins

- [ChatGPT.nvim](https://github.com/jackMort/ChatGPT.nvim) - Effortless Natural
  Language Generation with OpenAI's ChatGPT API 
- [avante.nvim](https://github.com/yetone/avante.nvim) - Use your Neovim like
  using Cursor AI IDE! 
- [codecompanion.nvim](https://github.com/olimorris/codecompanion.nvim) -
  AI-powered coding, seamlessly in Neovim. Supports Anthropic, Copilot, Gemini,
  Ollama and OpenAI LLMs
